---
layout: post 
title: Maven (11) Standard Directory Structure
description: Understanding the standard directory structure in Maven projects.
date: 2023-12-05 11:41:05 +0800 
image: /images/covers/maven-cover.jpg
tags:
- Maven
category: ['Maven']
---

1. Table of Contents
{:toc}

Having a standard directory structure provides Maven project users with a sense of familiarity when transitioning from one project to another. This practice is akin to adopting a consistent look and feel across websites.

The following section outlines the expected directory layout by Maven and the layout Maven creates. It's advisable to adhere to this structure as closely as possible. If not feasible, these settings can be overridden through project descriptors.

| Directory             | Description                        |
| --------------------- | ---------------------------------- |
| `src/main/java`       | Application/Library source code    |
| `src/main/resources`  | Application/Library resources      |
| `src/main/filters`    | Resource filter files              |
| `src/main/webapp`     | Web application source code        |
| `src/test/java`       | Test source code                   |
| `src/test/resources`  | Test resources                     |
| `src/test/filters`    | Test resource filter files         |
| `src/it`              | Integration tests (primarily for plugins) |
| `src/assembly`        | Assembly descriptors               |
| `src/site`            | Website                            |
| `LICENSE.txt`         | Project license                    |
| `NOTICE.txt`          | Notice and attributions for dependencies |
| `README.txt`          | Project readme                     |

At the top level are files describing the project: the `pom.xml` file. Additionally, there are text files like `README.txt`, `LICENSE.txt`, etc., for users to read upon receiving the source code.

This structure consists of only two subdirectories: `src` and `target`. The only other directories needed here are metadata such as `CVS`, `.git`, or `.svn`, and any subprojects in multi-project builds (each subproject follows the layout above).

The `target` directory is used to store all outputs from the build process.

The `src` directory contains all source materials for building the project, website, etc. Each type has a subdirectory: `main` for primary build artifacts, `test` for unit test code and resources, `site`, etc.

Within the build artifacts directories (`main` and `test`), there's a directory for `java` language (with a regular package hierarchy underneath) and one for `resources` (structured to be copied to the target classpath per default resource definitions).

If there are other contributions to the build process, they reside in additional subdirectories. For example, `src/main/antlr` contains Antlr grammar definition files.
