---
layout: post 
title: Maven (Part 7) - Naming Conventions Guide
description: 
date: 2023-12-04 13:05:40 +0800 
image: /images/covers/maven-cover.jpg
tags:
- Maven
category: ['Maven']
---

1. Table of Contents
{:toc}

## groupId

The **groupId** uniquely identifies your project across all projects and should follow the [Java package naming rules](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se6/html/packages.html#7.7). This means it starts with a reversed domain name that you control. For example, `org.apache.maven`, `org.apache.commons`.

While Maven doesn't strictly enforce this rule, many traditional projects don't adhere to this convention and use single-word IDs instead. However, new single-word IDs will find it challenging to be approved for inclusion in the Maven Central repository.

You can create as many subgroups as needed. Using the project structure is a good way to determine the granularity of the `groupId`. That is, if the current project is a multi-module project, you should append a new identifier to the parent project's `groupId`. For example, `org.apache.maven`, `org.apache.maven.plugins`, `org.apache.maven.reporting`.

## artifactId

The **artifactId** is the name of the jar file without the version. If it's something you've created, you can choose any name you like (lowercase letters, no strange symbols). However, if it's a third-party jar, you must use the distributed jar's name. For example, `maven`, `commons-math`.

## version

If you're releasing a version, you can choose any typical version with numbers and dots (1.0, 1.1, 1.0.1...). Avoid using dates as they're usually associated with SNAPSHOT (nightly) versions. However, for third-party tools, you must use their version number, whatever it may be, even if it looks odd. For example, `2.0`, `2.0.1`, `1.3.1`.